It is a melancholy experience for a professional mathematician to
find himself writing about mathematics. The function of a
mathematician is to do something, to prove new theorems, to add
to mathematics, and not to talk about what he or other mathematicians have done. Statesmen despise publicists, painters despise
art-critics, and physiologists, physicists, or mathematicians have
usually similar feelings: there is no scorn more profound, or on
the whole more justifiable, than that of the men who make for the
men who explain. Exposition, criticism, appreciation, is work for
second-rate minds.
I can remember arguing this point once in one of the few
serious conversations that I ever had with Housman. Housman, in
his Leslie Stephen lecture The Name and Nature of Poetry, had
denied very emphatically that he was a ‘critic’; but he had denied
it in what seemed to me a singularly perverse way, and had
expressed an admiration for literary criticism which startled and
scandalized me.
He had begun with a quotation from his inaugural lecture,
delivered twenty-two years before—
Whether the faculty of literary criticism is the best
gift that Heaven has in its treasures, I cannot say; but
Heaven seems to think so, for assuredly it is the gift
most charily bestowed. Orators and poets…, if rare in
comparison with blackberries, are commoner than returns of Halley's comet: literary critics are less common.
And he had continued.
In these twenty-two years I have improved in some
respects and deteriorated in others, but I have not so
much improved as to become a literary critic, nor so
much deteriorated as to fancy that I have become one.
It had seemed to me deplorable that a great scholar and a fine
poet should write like this, and, finding myself next to him in
Hall a few weeks later, I plunged in and said so. Did he really
mean what he had said to be taken very seriously? Would the life
of the best of critics really have seemed to him comparable with
that of a scholar and a poet? We argued the questions all through
dinner, and I think that finally he agreed with me. I must not seem
to claim a dialectical triumph over a man who can no longer
contradict me, but ‘Perhaps not entirely’ was, in the end, his reply
to the first question, and ‘Probably no’ to the second.
There may have been some doubt about Housman's feelings,
and I do not wish to claim him as on my side; but there is no
doubt at all about the feelings of men of science, and I share them
fully. If then I find myself writing, not mathematics, but ‘about’
mathematics, it is a confession of weakness, for which I may
rightly be scorned or pitied by younger and more vigorous
mathematicians. I write about mathematics because, like any
other mathematician who has passed sixty, I have no longer the
freshness of mind, the energy, or the patience to carry on
effectively with my proper job.
I propose to put forward an apology for mathematics; and I may
be told that it needs none, since there are now few studies more
generally recognized, for good reasons or bad, as profitable and
praiseworthy. This may be true: indeed it is probable, since the
sensational triumphs of Einstein, that stellar astronomy and
atomic physics are the only sciences which stand higher in
popular estimation. A mathematician need not now consider
himself on the defensive. He does not have to meet the sort of
opposition describe by Bradley in the admirable defence of
metaphysics which forms the introduction to Appearance and
Reality.
A metaphysician, says Bradley, will be told that ‘metaphysical
knowledge is wholly impossible’, or that ‘even if possible to a
certain degree, it is practically no knowledge worth the name’.
‘The same problems,’ he will hear, ‘the same disputes, the same
sheer failure. Why not abandon it and come out? Is there nothing
else worth your labour?’ There is no one so stupid as to use this
sort of language about mathematics. The mass of mathematical
truth is obvious and imposing; its practical applications, the
bridges and steam-engines and dynamos, obtrude themselves on
the dullest imagination. The public does not need to be convinced
that there is something in mathematics.
All this is in its way very comforting to mathematicians, but it
is hardly possible for a genuine mathematician to be content with
it. Any genuine mathematician must feel that it is not on these
crude achievements that the real case for mathematics rests, that
the popular reputation of mathematics is based largely on
ignorance and confusion, and there is room for a more rational
defence. At any rate, I am disposed to try to make one. It should
be a simpler task than Bradley’s difficult apology.
I shall ask, then, why is it really worth while to make a serious
study of mathematics? What is the proper justification of a
mathematician’s life? And my answers will be, for the most part,
such as are expected from a mathematician: I think that it is worth
while, that there is ample justification. But I should say at once
that my defence of mathematics will be a defence of myself, and
that my apology is bound to be to some extent egotistical. I
should not think it worth while to apologize for my subject if I
regarded myself as one of its failures.
Some egotism of this sort is inevitable, and I do not feel that it
really needs justification. Good work is no done by ‘humble’
men. It is one of the first duties of a professor, for example, in
any subject, to exaggerate a little both the importance of his
subject and his own importance in it. A man who is always asking,
Is what I do worth while?’ and ‘Am I the right person to do it?
A man who sets out to justify his existence and his activities has
to distinguish two different questions. The first is whether the
work which he does is worth doing; and the second is why he
does it, whatever its value may be. The first question is often very
difficult, and the answer very discouraging, but most people will
find the second easy enough even then. Their answers, if they are
honest, will usually take one or other of two forms; and the
second form is a merely a humbler variation of the first, which is
the only answer we need consider seriously.
I do what I do because it is the one and only thing that I
can do at all well. I am a lawyer, or a stockbroker, or a professional cricketer, because I have some real talent for that particular
job. I am a lawyer because I have a fluent tongue, and am
interested in legal subtleties; I am a stockbroker because my
judgment of the markets is quick and sound; I am a professional
cricketer because I can bat unusually well. I agree that it might be
better to be a poet or a mathematician, but unfortunately I have no
talent for such pursuits.
I am not suggesting that this is a defence which can be made
by most people, since most people can do nothing at all well. But
it is impregnable when it can be made without absurdity, as it can
by a substantial minority: perhaps five or even ten percent of men
can do something rather well. It is a tiny minority who can do
something really well, and the number of men who can do two
things well is negligible.
This view was endorsed by Dr Johnson
When I told him that I had been to see [his namesake] Johnson ride upon three horses, he said ‘Such a
man, sir, should be encouraged, for his performances
show the extent of the human powers.
We have of course to take account of the differences in value
between different activities. I would rather be a novelist or a
painter than a statesman of similar rank; and there are many roads
to fame which most of us would reject as actively pernicious. Yet
it is seldom that such differences of value will turn the scale in a
man’s choice of a career, which will almost always be dictated by
the limitations of his natural abilities. Poetry is more valuable
than cricket, but Bradman would be a fool if he sacrificed his
cricket in order to write second-rate minor poetry (and I suppose
that it is unlikely that he could do better). If the cricket were a
little less supreme, and the poetry better, then the choice might be
more difficult: I do not know whether I would rather have been
Victor Trumper or Rupert Brooke. It is fortunate that such
dilemmas are so seldom.
I may add that they are particularly unlikely to present themselves to a mathematician.
If a man is in any sense a real mathematician, then it is
a hundred to one that his mathematics will be far better than
anything else he can do, and that he would be silly if he surrendered any decent opportunity of exercising his one talent in order
to do undistinguished work in other fields. Such a sacrifice could
be justified only by economic necessity or age.
I had better say something here about this question of age, since it
is particularly important for mathematicians. No mathematician
should ever allow himself to forget that mathematics, more than
any other art or science, is a young man's game. To take a simple
illustration at a comparatively humble level, the average age of
election to the Royal Society is lowest in mathematics. We can
naturally find much more striking illustrations. We may consider,
for example, the career of a man who was certainly one of the
world's three greatest mathematicians. Newton gave up mathematics at fifty, and had lost his enthusiasm long before; he had
recognized no doubt by the time he was forty that his greatest
creative days were over. His greatest idea of all, fluxions and the
law of gravitation, came to him about 1666 , when he was twentyfour in those days I was in the prime of my age for invention,
and minded mathematics and philosophy more than at any time
sine.
On the other hand the gain is no more likely to be substantial:
the later records of mathematicians are not particularly encouraging. Newton made a quite competent Master of the Mint (when
he was not quarrelling with anybody). Painlevé was a not very
successful Premier of France. Laplace’s political career was
highly discreditable, but he is hardly a fair instance since he was
dishonest rather than incompetent, and never really ‘gave up’
mathematics. It is very hard to find an instance of a first-rate
mathematician who has abandoned mathematics and attained
first-rate distinction in any other field.1
 There may have been
young men who would have been first-rate mathematician if they
had stuck in mathematics, but I have never heard of a really
plausible example. And all this is fully borne out by my very own
limited experience. Every young mathematician of real talent
whom I have known has been faithful to mathematics, and not
form lack of ambition but from abundance of it; they have all
recognized that there, if anywhere, lay the road to a life of any
distinction.
I have been looking again at the first pages of the inaugural
lecture which I gave at Oxford in 1920 , where there is an outline
of an apology for mathematics. It is very inadequate (less than a
couple of page), and is written in a style (a first essay, I suppose,
in what I then imagined to be the ‘Oxford manner’) of which I am
not now particularly proud; but I still feel that, however much
development it may need, it contains the essentials of the matter. I
will resume what I said then, as a preface to a fuller discussion.
 I went on to say that ‘the scale of the universe is large and,
if we are wasting our time, the waste of the lives of a few
university dons is no such overwhelming catastrophe’; and here I
may seem to be adopting, or affecting, the pose of exaggerated
humility which I repudiated a moment ago. I am sure that that
was not what was really in my mind: I was trying to say in a
sentence that which I have said at much greater length in §3. I
was assuming that we dons really had our little talents, and that
we could hardly be wrong if we did our best to cultivate them
further.
There are many highly respected motives which may lead men
to prosecute research, but three which are much more important
than the rest. The first (without which the rest must come to
nothing) is intellectual curiosity, desire to know the truth. Then,
professional pride, anxiety to be satisfied with one’s performance,
the shame that overcomes any self-respecting craftsman when his
work is unworthy of his talent. Finally, ambition, desire for
reputation, and the position, even the power or the money, which
it brings. It may be fine to feel, when you have done your work,
that you have added to the happiness or alleviated the sufferings
of others, but that will not be why you did it. So if a mathematician, or a chemist, or even a physiologist, were to tell me that the
driving force in his work had been the desired to benefit
humanity, then I should not believe him (nor should I think the
better of him if I did). His dominant motives have been those
which I have stated, and in which, surely, there is nothing of
which any decent man need be ashamed.
