
This essay on the nature of proof and progress in mathematics was stimulated
by the article of Jaffe and Quinn, “Theoretical Mathematics: Toward a cultural
synthesis of mathematics and theoretical physics”. Their article raises interesting
issues that mathematicians should pay more attention to, but it also perpetuates
some widely held beliefs and attitudes that need to be questioned and examined.
The article had one paragraph portraying some of my work in a way that diverges
from my experience, and it also diverges from the observations of people in the field
whom I’ve discussed it with as a reality check.
After some reflection, it seemed to me that what Jaffe and Quinn wrote was
an example of the phenomenon that people see what they are tuned to see. Their
portrayal of my work resulted from projecting the sociology of mathematics onto a
one-dimensional scale (speculation versus rigor) that ignores many basic phenomena.
Responses to the Jaffe-Quinn article have been invited from a number of mathematicians, and I expect it to receive plenty of specific analysis and criticism from
others. Therefore, I will concentrate in this essay on the positive rather than on
the contranegative. I will describe my view of the process of mathematics, referring
only occasionally to Jaffe and Quinn by way of comparison.
In attempting to peel back layers of assumptions, it is important to try to begin
with the right questions.
What is it that mathematicians accomplish?
There are many issues buried in this question, which I have tried to phrase in a
way that does not presuppose the nature of the answer.
It would not be good to start, for example, with the question
How do mathematicians prove theorems?
This question introduces an interesting topic, but to start with it would be to
project two hidden assumptions.
It is worthwhile to examine these hypotheses, rather than to accept them as obvious
and proceed from there.
The question is not even.
How do mathematicians make progress in mathematics?

Rather, as a more explicit (and leading) form of the question, I prefer
How do mathematicians advance human understanding of mathematics?
This question brings to the fore something that is fundamental and pervasive:
that what we are doing is finding ways for people to understand and think about
mathematics.
The rapid advance of computers has helped dramatize this point, because computers and people are very different. For instance, when Appel and Haken completed a proof of the 4-color map theorem using a massive automatic computation,
it evoked much controversy. I interpret the controversy as having little to do with
doubt people had as to the veracity of the theorem or the correctness of the proof.
Rather, it reflected a continuing desire for human understanding of a proof, in
addition to knowledge that the theorem is true.
On a more everyday level, it is common for people first starting to grapple with
computers to make large-scale computations of things they might have done on a
smaller scale by hand. They might print out a table of the first 10,000 primes,
only to find that their printout isn’t something they really wanted after all. They
discover by this kind of experience that what they really want is usually not some
collection of “answers”—what they want is understanding.
It may sound almost circular to say that what mathematicians are accomplishing
is to advance human understanding of mathematics. I will not try to resolve this by
discussing what mathematics is, because it would take us far afield. Mathematicians
generally feel that they know what mathematics is, but find it difficult to give a good
direct definition. It is interesting to try. For me, “the theory of formal patterns”
has come the closest, but to discuss this would be a whole essay in itself.
Could the difficulty in giving a good direct definition of mathematics be an
essential one, indicating that mathematics has an essential recursive quality? Along
these lines we might say that mathematics is the smallest subject satisfying the
following.

In other words, as mathematics advances, we incorporate it into our thinking. As
our thinking becomes more sophisticated, we generate new mathematical concepts
and new mathematical structures: the subject matter of mathematics changes to
reflect how we think.
If what we are doing is constructing better ways of thinking, then psychological
and social dimensions are essential to a good model for mathematical progress.
These dimensions are absent from the popular model. In caricature, the popular
model holds that.

mathematicians start from a few basic mathematical structures and a collection of axioms “given” about these structures, that.
there are various important questions to be answered about these structures
that can be stated as formal mathematical propositions, and.
the task of the mathematician is to seek a deductive pathway from the
axioms to the propositions or to their denials.
We might call this the definition-theorem-proof (DTP) model of mathematics.
A clear difficulty with the DTP model is that it doesn’t explain the source of
the questions. Jaffe and Quinn discuss speculation (which they inappropriately label “theoretical mathematics”) as an important additional ingredient. Speculation
consists of making conjectures, raising questions, and making intelligent guesses
and heuristic arguments about what is probably true.
Jaffe and Quinn’s DSTP model still fails to address some basic issues. We are not
trying to meet some abstract production quota of definitions, theorems and proofs.
The measure of our success is whether what we do enables people to understand
and think more clearly and effectively about mathematics.
Therefore, we need to ask ourselves.
How do people understand mathematics?
This is a very hard question. Understanding is an individual and internal matter
that is hard to be fully aware of, hard to understand and often hard to communicate.
We can only touch on it lightly here.
People have very different ways of understanding particular pieces of mathematics. To illustrate this, it is best to take an example that practicing mathematicians
understand in multiple ways, but that we see our students struggling with. The
derivative of a function fits well. The derivative can be thought of as:
Infinitesimal: the ratio of the infinitesimal change in the value of a function
to the infinitesimal change in a function.
Geometric: the derivative is the slope of a line tangent to the graph of the
function, if the graph has a tangent.
(5) Rate: the instantaneous speed of f(t), when t is time.
(6) Approximation: The derivative of a function is the best linear approximation to the function near a point.
(7) Microscopic: The derivative of a function is the limit of what you get by
looking at it under a microscope of higher and higher power.
This is a list of different ways of thinking about or conceiving of the derivative,
rather than a list of different logical definitions. Unless great efforts are made to
maintain the tone and flavor of the original human insights, the differences start
to evaporate as soon as the mental concepts are translated into precise, formal and
explicit definitions.
I can remember absorbing each of these concepts as something new and interesting, and spending a good deal of mental time and effort digesting and practicing
with each, reconciling it with the others. I also remember coming back to revisit
these different concepts later with added meaning and understanding.
The list continues; there is no reason for it ever to stop. A sample entry further
down the list may help illustrate this. We may think we know all there is to say
about a certain subject, but new insights are around the corner. Furthermore, one
person’s clear mental image is another person’s intimidation.
These differences are not just a curiosity. Human thinking and understanding
do not work on a single track, like a computer with a single central processing unit.
Our brains and minds seem to be organized into a variety of separate, powerful
facilities. These facilities work together loosely, “talking” to each other at high
levels rather than at low levels of organization.
Here are some major divisions that are important for mathematical thinking.
Human language. We have powerful special-purpose facilities for speaking
and understanding human language, which also tie in to reading and writing. Our linguistic facility is an important tool for thinking, not just for
communication. A crude example is the quadratic formula which people
may remember as a little chant, “ex equals minus bee plus or minus the
square root of bee squared minus four ay see all over two.
 Vision, spatial sense, kinesthetic (motion) sense. People have very powerful
facilities for taking in information visually or kinesthetically, and thinking
with their spatial sense. On the other hand, they do not have a very
good built-in facility for inverse vision, that is, turning an internal spatial
understanding back into a two-dimensional image. Consequently, mathematicians usually have fewer and poorer figures in their papers and books
than in their heads.
An interesting phenomenon in spatial thinking is that scale makes a big
difference. We can think about little objects in our hands, or we can think
of bigger human-sized structures that we scan, or we can think of spatial
structures that encompass us and that we move around in. We tend to
think more effectively with spatial imagery on a larger scale: it’s as if our
brains take larger things more seriously and can devote more resources to
them.
Logic and deduction. We have some built-in ways of reasoning and putting
things together associated with how we make logical deductions: cause and
effect (related to implication), contradiction or negation, etc.
Mathematicians apparently don’t generally rely on the formal rules of deduction as they are thinking. Rather, they hold a fair bit of logical structure
of a proof in their heads, breaking proofs into intermediate results so that
they don’t have to hold too much logic at once. In fact, it is common
for excellent mathematicians not even to know the standard formal usage.
Intuition, association, metaphor. People have amazing facilities for sensing
something without knowing where it comes from (intuition); for sensing
that some phenomenon or situation or object is like something else (association); and for building and testing connections and comparisons, holding
two things in mind at the same time (metaphor). These facilities are quite
important for mathematics. Personally, I put a lot of effort into “listening”
to my intuitions and associations, and building them into metaphors and
connections. This involves a kind of simultaneous quieting and focusing of
my mind. Words, logic, and detailed pictures rattling around can inhibit
intuitions and associations.
Process and time. We have a facility for thinking about processes or sequences of actions that can often be used to good effect in mathematical
reasoning. One way to think of a function is as an action, a process, that
takes the domain to the range. This is particularly valuable when composing functions. Another use of this facility is in remembering proofs:
people often remember a proof as a process consisting of several steps. In
topology, the notion of a homotopy is most often thought of as a process
taking time. Mathematically, time is no different from one more spatial
dimension, but since humans interact with it in a quite different way, it is
psychologically very different.
The transfer of understanding from one person to another is not automatic. It
is hard and tricky. Therefore, to analyze human understanding of mathematics, it
is important to consider who understands what, and when.
Mathematicians have developed habits of communication that are often dysfunctional. Organizers of colloquium talks everywhere exhort speakers to explain things
in elementary terms. Nonetheless, most of the audience at an average colloquium
talk gets little of value from it. Perhaps they are lost within the first 5 minutes, yet
sit silently through the remaining 55 minutes. Or perhaps they quickly lose interest
because the speaker plunges into technical details without presenting any reason to
investigate them. At the end of the talk, the few mathematicians who are close to
the field of the speaker ask a question or two to avoid embarrassment.
This pattern is similar to what often holds in classrooms, where we go through the
motions of saying for the record what we think the students “ought” to learn, while
the students are trying to grapple with the more fundamental issues of learning.
our language and guessing at our mental models. Books compensate by giving
samples of how to solve every type of homework problem. Professors compensate
by giving homework and tests that are much easier than the material “covered” in
the course, and then grading the homework and tests on a scale that requires little
understanding. We assume that the problem is with the students rather than with
communication: that the students either just don’t have what it takes, or else just
don’t care.
Outsiders are amazed at this phenomenon, but within the mathematical community, we dismiss it with shrugs.
Much of the difficulty has to do with the language and culture of mathematics,
which is divided into subfields. Basic concepts used every day within one subfield are
often foreign to another subfield. Mathematicians give up on trying to understand
the basic concepts even from neighboring subfields, unless they were clued in as
graduate students.
In contrast, communication works very well within the subfields of mathematics. Within a subfield, people develop a body of common knowledge and known
techniques. By informal contact, people learn to understand and copy each other’s
ways of thinking, so that ideas can be explained clearly and easily.
Mathematical knowledge can be transmitted amazingly fast within a subfield.
When a significant theorem is proved, it often (but not always) happens that the
solution can be communicated in a matter of minutes from one person to another
within the subfield. The same proof would be communicated and generally understood in an hour talk to members of the subfield. It would be the subject of a 15-
or 20-page paper, which could be read and understood in a few hours or perhaps
days by members of the subfield.
Why is there such a big expansion from the informal discussion to the talk
to the paper? One-on-one, people use wide channels of communication that go
far beyond formal mathematical language. They use gestures, they draw pictures
and diagrams, they make sound effects and use body language. Communication
is more likely to be two-way, so that people can concentrate on what needs the
most attention. With these channels of communication, they are in a much better
position to convey what’s going on, not just in their logical and linguistic facilities,
but in their other mental facilities as well.
In talks, people are more inhibited and more formal. Mathematical audiences are
often not very good at asking the questions that are on most people’s minds, and
speakers often have an unrealistic preset outline that inhibits them from addressing
questions even when they are asked.
In papers, people are still more formal. Writers translate their ideas into symbols
and logic, and readers try to translate back.
Why is there such a discrepancy between communication within a subfield and
communication outside of subfields, not to mention communication outside mathematics?
Mathematics in some sense has a common language: a language of symbols, technical definitions, computations, and logic. This language efficiently conveys some,
but not all, modes of mathematical thinking. Mathematicians learn to translate
certain things almost unconsciously from one mental mode to the other, so that
some statements quickly become clear. Different mathematicians study papers in.
different ways, but when I read a mathematical paper in a field in which I’m conversant, I concentrate on the thoughts that are between the lines. I might look over
several paragraphs or strings of equations and think to myself “Oh yeah, they’re
putting in enough rigamarole to carry such-and-such idea.” When the idea is clear,
the formal setup is usually unnecessary and redundant—I often feel that I could
write it out myself more easily than figuring out what the authors actually wrote.
It’s like a new toaster that comes with a 16-page manual. If you already understand toasters and if the toaster looks like previous toasters you’ve encountered,
you might just plug it in and see if it works, rather than first reading all the details
in the manual.
People familiar with ways of doing things in a subfield recognize various patterns
of statements or formulas as idioms or circumlocution for certain concepts or mental
images. But to people not already familiar with what’s going on the same patterns
are not very illuminating; they are often even misleading. The language is not alive
except to those who use it.
I’d like to make an important remark here: there are some mathematicians who
are conversant with the ways of thinking in more than one subfield, sometimes
in quite a number of subfields. Some mathematicians learn the jargon of several
subfields as graduate students, some people are just quick at picking up foreign
mathematical language and culture, and some people are in mathematical centers
where they are exposed to many subfields. People who are comfortable in more than
one subfield can often have a very positive influence, serving as bridges, and helping
different groups of mathematicians learn from each other. But people knowledgeable in multiple fields can also have a negative effect, by intimidating others, and
by helping to validate and maintain the whole system of generally poor communication. For example, one effect often takes place during colloquium talks, where
one or two widely knowledgeable people sitting in the front row may serve as the
speaker’s mental guide to the audience.
There is another effect caused by the big differences between how we think
about mathematics and how we write it. A group of mathematicians interacting
with each other can keep a collection of mathematical ideas alive for a period of
years, even though the recorded version of their mathematical work differs from
their actual thinking, having much greater emphasis on language, symbols, logic
and formalism. But as new batches of mathematicians learn about the subject they
tend to interpret what they read and hear more literally, so that the more easily
recorded and communicated formalism and machinery tend to gradually take over
from other modes of thinking.
There are two counters to this trend, so that mathematics does not become
entirely mired down in formalism. First, younger generations of mathematicians
are continually discovering and rediscovering insights on their own, thus reinjecting
diverse modes of human thought into mathematics.
Second, mathematicians sometimes invent names and hit on unifying definitions
that replace technical circumlocutions and give good handles for insights. Names
like “group” to replace “a system of substitutions satisfying . . . ”, and “manifold”
to replace.
We mathematicians need to put far greater effort into communicating mathematical ideas. To accomplish this, we need to pay much more attention to communicating not just our definitions, theorems, and proofs, but also our ways of
thinking. We need to appreciate the value of different ways of thinking about the
same mathematical structure.
We need to focus far more energy on understanding and explaining the basic
mental infrastructure of mathematics—with consequently less energy on the most
recent results. This entails developing mathematical language that is effective for
the radical purpose of conveying ideas to people who don’t already know them.
Part of this communication is through proofs.
When I started as a graduate student at Berkeley, I had trouble imagining how
I could “prove” a new and interesting mathematical theorem. I didn’t really understand what a “proof” was.
By going to seminars, reading papers, and talking to other graduate students,
I gradually began to catch on. Within any field, there are certain theorems and
certain techniques that are generally known and generally accepted. When you
write a paper, you refer to these without proof. You look at other papers in the
field, and you see what facts they quote without proof, and what they cite in their
bibliography. You learn from other people some idea of the proofs. Then you’re
free to quote the same theorem and cite the same citations. You don’t necessarily
have to read the full papers or books that are in your bibliography. Many of the
things that are generally known are things for which there may be no known written
source. As long as people in the field are comfortable that the idea works, it doesn’t
need to have a formal written source.
At first I was highly suspicious of this process. I would doubt whether a certain
idea was really established. But I found that I could ask people, and they could
produce explanations and proofs, or else refer me to other people or to written
sources that would give explanations and proofs. There were published theorems
that were generally known to be false, or where the proofs were generally known
to be incomplete. Mathematical knowledge and understanding were embedded in
the minds and in the social fabric of the community of people thinking about a.
This knowledge was supported by written documents, but the
written documents were not really primary.
I think this pattern varies quite a bit from field to field. I was interested in
geometric areas of mathematics, where it is often pretty hard to have a document
that reflects well the way people actually think. In more algebraic or symbolic
fields, this is not necessarily so, and I have the impression that in some areas
documents are much closer to carrying the life of the field. But in any field, there
is a strong social standard of validity and truth. Andrew Wiles’s proof of Fermat’s
Last Theorem is a good illustration of this, in a field which is very algebraic. The
experts quickly came to believe that his proof was basically correct on the basis
of high-level ideas, long before details could be checked. This proof will receive a
great deal of scrutiny and checking compared to most mathematical proofs; but no
matter how the process of verification plays out, it helps illustrate how mathematics
evolves by rather organic psychological and social processes.
When people are doing mathematics, the flow of ideas and the social standard of
validity is much more reliable than formal documents. People are usually not very
good in checking formal correctness of proofs, but they are quite good at detecting
potential weaknesses or flaws in proofs.
To avoid misinterpretation, I’d like to emphasize two things I am not saying.
First, I am not advocating any weakening of our community standard of proof; I
am trying to describe how the process really works. Careful proofs that will stand
up to scrutiny are very important. I think the process of proof on the whole works
pretty well in the mathematical community. The kind of change I would advocate
is that mathematicians take more care with their proofs, making them really clear
and as simple as possible so that if any weakness is present it will be easy to
detect. Second, I am not criticizing the mathematical study of formal proofs, nor
am I criticizing people who put energy into making mathematical arguments more
explicit and more formal. These are both useful activities that shed new insights
on mathematics.
I have spent a fair amount of effort during periods of my career exploring mathematical questions by computer. In view of that experience, I was astonished to see
the statement of Jaffe and Quinn that mathematics is extremely slow and arduous,
and that it is arguably the most disciplined of all human activities. The standard
of correctness and completeness necessary to get a computer program to work at
all is a couple of orders of magnitude higher than the mathematical community’s
standard of valid proofs. Nonetheless, large computer programs, even when they
have been very carefully written and very carefully tested, always seem to have
bugs.
I think that mathematics is one of the most intellectually gratifying of human
activities. Because we have a high standard for clear and convincing thinking and
because we place a high value on listening to and trying to understand each other,
we don’t engage in interminable arguments and endless redoing of our mathematics.
We are prepared to be convinced by others. Intellectually, mathematics moves very
quickly. Entire mathematical landscapes change and change again in amazing ways
during a single career.
When one considers how hard it is to write a computer program even approaching
the intellectual scope of a good mathematical paper, and how much greater time and.
effort have to be put into it to make it “almost” formally correct, it is preposterous
to claim that mathematics as we practice it is anywhere near formally correct.
Mathematics as we practice it is much more formally complete and precise than
other sciences, but it is much less formally complete and precise for its content
than computer programs. The difference has to do not just with the amount of
effort: the kind of effort is qualitatively different. In large computer programs,
a tremendous proportion of effort must be spent on myriad compatibility issues:
making sure that all definitions are consistent, developing “good” data structures
that have useful but not cumbersome generality, deciding on the “right” generality
for functions, etc. The proportion of energy spent on the working part of a large
program, as distinguished from the bookkeeping part, is surprisingly small. Because of compatibility issues that almost inevitably escalate out of hand because
the “right” definitions change as generality and functionality are added, computer
programs usually need to be rewritten frequently, often from scratch.
A very similar kind of effort would have to go into mathematics to make it
formally correct and complete. It is not that formal correctness is prohibitively
difficult on a small scale—it’s that there are many possible choices of formalization
on small scales that translate to huge numbers of interdependent choices in the large.
It is quite hard to make these choices compatible; to do so would certainly entail
going back and rewriting from scratch all old mathematical papers whose results we
depend on. It is also quite hard to come up with good technical choices for formal
definitions that will be valid in the variety of ways that mathematicians want to
use them and that will anticipate future extensions of mathematics. If we were to
continue to cooperate, much of our time would be spent with international standards
commissions to establish uniform definitions and resolve huge controversies.
Mathematicians can and do fill in gaps, correct errors, and supply more detail
and more careful scholarship when they are called on or motivated to do so. Our
system is quite good at producing reliable theorems that can be solidly backed up.
It’s just that the reliability does not primarily come from mathematicians formally
checking formal arguments; it comes from mathematicians thinking carefully and
critically about mathematical ideas.
On the most fundamental level, the foundations of mathematics are much shakier
than the mathematics that we do. Most mathematicians adhere to foundational
principles that are known to be polite fictions. For example, it is a theorem that
there does not exist any way to ever actually construct or even define a well-ordering
of the real numbers. There is considerable evidence (but no proof) that we can get
away with these polite fictions without being caught out, but that doesn’t make
them right. Set theorists construct many alternate and mutually contradictory
“mathematical universes” such that if one is consistent, the others are too. This
leaves very little confidence that one or the other is the right choice or the natural
choice. Godels incompleteness theorem implies that there can be no formal system
that is consistent, yet powerful enough to serve as a basis for all of the mathematics
that we do.
It is known that geometry assumes, as things given, both the notion of
space and the first principles of constructions in space. She gives definitions
of them which are merely nominal, while the true determinations appear in
the form of axioms. The relation of these assumptions remains consequently
in darkness; we neither perceive whether and how far their connection is
necessary, nor a priori, whether it is possible.
From Euclid to Legendre (to name the most famous of modern reforming geometers) this darkness was cleared up neither by mathematicians nor
by such philosophers as concerned themselves with it. The reason of this
is doubtless that the general notion of multiply extended magnitudes (in
which space-magnitudes are included) remained entirely unworked. I have
in the first place, therefore, set myself the task of constructing the notion of
a multiply extended magnitude out of general notions of magnitude. It will
follow from this that a multiply extended magnitude is capable of different
measure-relations, and consequently that space is only a particular case of
a triply extended magnitude. But hence flows as a necessary consequence
that the propositions of geometry cannot be derived from general notions of
magnitude, but that the properties which distinguish space from other conceivable triply extended magnitudes are only to be deduced from experience.
Thus arises the problem, to discover the simplest matters of fact from which
the measure-relations of space may be determined; a problem which from the
nature of the case is not completely determinate, since there may be several
systems of matters of fact which suffice to determine the measure-relations of
space—the most important system for our present purpose being that which
Euclid has laid down as a foundation. These matters of fact are—like all.
matters of fact—not necessary, but only of empirical certainty; they are hypotheses. We may therefore investigate their probability, which within the
limits of observation is of course very great, and inquire about the justice
of their extension beyond the limits of observation, on the side both of the
infinitely great and of the infinitely small.
I. Notion of an n-ply extended magnitude.
In proceeding to attempt the solution of the first of these problems, the
development of the notion of a multiply extended magnitude, I think I may
the more claim indulgent criticism in that I am not practised in such undertakings of a philosophical nature where the difficulty lies more in the notions
themselves than in the construction; and that besides some very short hints
on the matter given by Privy Councillor Gauss in his second memoir on
Biquadratic Residues, in the G¨ottingen Gelehrte Anzeige, and in his Jubileebook, and some philosophical researches of Herbart, I could make use of no
previous labours.
 Magnitude-notions are only possible where there is an antecedent
general notion which admits of different specialisations. According as there
exists among these specialisations a continuous path from one to another or
not, they form a continuous or discrete manifoldness; the individual specialisations are called in the first case points, in the second case elements, of the
manifoldness. Notions whose specialisations form a discrete manifoldness are
so common that at least in the cultivated languages any things being given
it is always possible to find a notion in which they are included. (Hence
mathematicians might unhesitatingly found the theory of discrete magnitudes upon the postulate that certain given things are to be regarded as
equivalent.) On the other hand, so few and far between are the occasions for
forming notions whose specialisations make up a continuous manifoldness,
that the only simple notions whose specialisations form a multiply extended
manifoldness are the positions of perceived objects and colours. More frequent occasions for the creation and development of these notions occur first
in the higher mathematic.
Definite portions of a manifoldness, distinguished by a mark or by a
boundary, are called Quanta. Their comparison with regard to quantity is
accomplished in the case of discrete magnitudes by counting, in the case of
continuous magnitudes by measuring. Measure consists in the superposition
of the magnitudes to be compared; it therefore requires a means of using
one magnitude as the standard for another. In the absence of this, two
magnitudes can only be compared when one is a part of the other; in which.
case also we can only determine the more or less and not the how much. The
researches which can in this case be instituted about them form a general
division of the science of magnitude in which magnitudes are regarded not as
existing independently of position and not as expressible in terms of a unit,
but as regions in a manifoldness. Such researches have become a necessity for
many parts of mathematics, e.g., for the treatment of many-valued analytical
functions; and the want of them is no doubt a chief cause why the celebrated
theorem of Abel and the achievements of Lagrange, Pfaff, Jacobi for the
general theory of differential equations, have so long remained unfruitful. Out
of this general part of the science of extended magnitude in which nothing is
assumed but what is contained in the notion of it, it will suffice for the present
purpose to bring into prominence two points; the first of which relates to the
construction of the notion of a multiply extended manifoldness, the second
relates to the reduction of determinations of place in a given manifoldness
to determinations of quantity, and will make clear the true character of an
n-fold extent.
If in the case of a notion whose specialisations form a continuous
manifoldness, one passes from a certain specialisation in a definite way to
another, the specialisations passed over form a simply extended manifoldness, whose true character is that in it a continuous progress from a point is
possible only on two sides, forwards or backwards. If one now supposes that
this manifoldness in its turn passes over into another entirely different, and
again in a definite way, namely so that each point passes over into a definite
point of the other, then all the specialisations so obtained form a doubly
extended manifoldness. In a similar manner one obtains a triply extended
manifoldness, if one imagines a doubly extended one passing over in a definite
way to another entirely different; and it is easy to see how this construction
may be continued. If one regards the variable object instead of the determinable notion of it, this construction may be described as a composition of
a variability of n + 1 dimensions out of a variability of n dimensions and a
variability of one dimension.
I shall show how conversely one may resolve a variability whose region
is given into a variability of one dimension and a variability of fewer dimensions. To this end let us suppose a variable piece of a manifoldness of one
dimension—reckoned from a fixed origin, that the values of it may be comparable with one another—which has for every point of the given manifoldness
a definite value, varying continuously with the point; or, in other words,
let us take a continuous function of position within the given manifoldness,
which, moreover, is not constant throughout any part of that manifoldness.
Every system of points where the function has a constant value, forms then a
continuous manifoldness of fewer dimensions than the given one. These manifoldnesses pass over continuously into one another as the function changes;
we may therefore assume that out of one of them the others proceed, and
speaking generally this may occur in such a way that each point passes over
into a definite point of the other; the cases of exception (the study of which
is important) may here be left unconsidered. Hereby the determination of
position in the given manifoldness is reduced to a determination of quantity
and to a determination of position in a manifoldness of less dimensions. It
is now easy to show that this manifoldness has n − 1 dimensions when the
given manifold is n-ply extended. By repeating then this operation n times,
the determination of position in an n-ply extended manifoldness is reduced
to n determinations of quantity, and therefore the determination of position
in a given manifoldness is reduced to a finite number of determinations of
quantity when this is possible. There are manifoldnesses in which the determination of position requires not a finite number, but either an endless series
or a continuous manifoldness of determinations of quantity. Such manifoldnesses are, for example, the possible determinations of a function for a given
region, the possible shapes of a solid figure.
Having constructed the notion of a manifoldness of n dimensions, and
found that its true character consists in the property that the determination of position in it may be reduced to n determinations of magnitude, we
come to the second of the problems proposed above, viz. the study of the
measure-relations of which such a manifoldness is capable, and of the conditions which suffice to determine them. These measure-relations can only be
studied in abstract notions of quantity, and their dependence on one another
can only be represented by formulæ. On certain assumptions, however, they
are decomposable into relations which, taken separately, are capable of geometric representation; and thus it becomes possible to express geometrically
the calculated results. In this way, to come to solid ground, we cannot, it is
true, avoid abstract considerations in our formulæ, but at least the results of
calculation may subsequently be presented in a geometric form. The foundations of these two parts of the question are established in the celebrated
memoir of Gauss, Disqusitiones generales circa superficies curvas.
In a flat n-fold extent the total curvature is zero at all points in every
direction; it is sufficient, however (according to the preceding investigation),
for the determination of measure-relations, to know that at each point the
curvature is zero in independent surface directions. Manifoldnesses
whose curvature is constantly zero may be treated as a special case of those
whose curvature is constant. The common character of those continua whose
curvature is constant may be also expressed thus, that figures may be viewed
in them without stretching. For clearly figures could not be arbitrarily shifted
and turned round in them if the curvature at each point were not the same in
all directions. On the other hand, however, the measure-relations of the manifoldness are entirely determined by the curvature; they are therefore exactly
the same in all directions at one point as at another, and consequently the
same constructions can be made from it: whence it follows that in aggregates
with constant curvature figures may have any arbitrary position given them.
If we suppose that bodies exist independently of position, the curvature
is everywhere constant, and it then results from astronomical measurements
that it cannot be different from zero; or at any rate its reciprocal must be an
area in comparison with which the range of our telescopes may be neglected.
But if this independence of bodies from position does not exist, we cannot
draw conclusions from metric relations of the great, to those of the infinitely
small; in that case the curvature at each point may have an arbitrary value
in three directions, provided that the total curvature of every measurable
portion of space does not differ sensibly from zero. Still more complicated
relations may exist if we no longer suppose the linear element expressible
as the square root of a quadric differential. Now it seems that the empirical
notions on which the metrical determinations of space are founded, the notion
of a solid body and of a ray of light, cease to be valid for the infinitely small.
We are therefore quite at liberty to suppose that the metric relations of space
in the infinitely small do not conform to the hypotheses of geometry; and we
ought in fact to suppose it, if we can thereby obtain a simpler explanation
of phenomena.
