Modern mathematics is nearly characterized by the use of rigorous proofs. This
practice, the result of literally thousands of years of refinement, has brought to
mathematics a clarity and reliability unmatched by any other science. But it also
makes mathematics slow and difficult; it is arguably the most disciplined of human
intellectual activities.
Groups and individuals within the mathematics community have from time to
time tried being less compulsive about details of arguments. The results have been
mixed, and they have occasionally been disastrous. Yet today in certain areas there
is again a trend toward basing mathematics on intuitive reasoning without proof.
To some extent this is the old pattern of history being repeated by those unfamiliar
with it. But it also may be the beginning of fundamental changes in the way
mathematics is organized. In either case, it is vital at this time to reexamine the
role of proofs in mathematical understanding and to develop a constructive context
for these trends.
We begin with a discussion of physics, partially because some of the current
movement results from an interaction with theoretical physics and partly because
it provides a useful model for potential sociological realignments. We then turn
to the history of mathematics for examples illustrating the benefits and hazards
of nonrigorous work. Finally, we suggest a framework which should allow different
approaches to coexist.
Typically, information about mathematical structures is achieved in two stages.
First, intuitive insights are developed, conjectures are made, and speculative outlines of justifications are suggested. Then the conjectures and speculations are
corrected; they are made reliable by proving them. We use the term theoretical
mathematics for the speculative and intuitive work; we refer to the proof-oriented
phase as rigorous mathematics. We do not wish to get involved in a discussion of
our choice of terminology; this is not the central point of our article. However, as
a point of departure, we briefly clarify our definitions of theory and rigor.
The initial stages of mathematical discovery—namely, the intuitive and conjectural work, like theoretical work in the sciences—involves speculations on the nature
of reality beyond established knowledge. Thus we borrow our name “theoretical”
from this use in physics. There is an older use of the word “theoretical” in mathematics, namely, to identify “pure” rather than applied mathematics; this is a usage
from the past which is no longer common and which we do not adopt.
Theoretical work requires correction, refinement, and validation through experiment or proof. Thus we claim that the role of rigorous proof in mathematics is
functionally analogous to the role of experiment in the natural sciences. This thesis
may be unfamiliar but after reflection should be clear at least to mathematicians.
Proofs serve two main purposes. First, proofs provide a way to ensure the reliability of mathematical claims, just as laboratory verification provides a check in
other sciences. Second, the act of finding a proof often yields, as a byproduct, new
insights and unexpected new data, just as does work in the laboratory.
Mathematicians may have even better experimental access to mathematical reality than the laboratory sciences have to physical reality. This is the point of
modeling: a physical phenomenon is approximated by a mathematical model; then
the model is studied precisely because it is more accessible. This accessibility also
has had consequences for mathematics on a social level. Mathematics is much
more finely subdivided into subdisciplines than physics, because the methods have
permitted a deeper penetration into the subject matter.
Although the use of proof in mathematics is functionally parallel to experiment,
we are not suggesting that proofs should be called “experimental” mathematics.
There is already a well-established and appropriate use of that term, namely, to
refer to numerical calculations and computer simulations as tests of mathematical
concepts. In fact, results of computer experiments are frequently presented in a
way we would call theoretical: general conclusions are proposed on the basis of test
cases and comparisons. The conclusions are not completely reliable, and an effort
to provide real proofs would inevitably turn up exceptions and limitations.
In physics we have come to accept a division of labor between theorists and
experimentalists. But in fact only recently has the division become so clear. Until
the beginning of the twentieth century there was basically one community of physicists. It was the ideal, and by and large the practice, that the same people both
speculated about theory and verified their speculations with laboratory experience.
Certainly in Europe it had become clear by 1900 that a bifurcation had occurred:
there were sufficiently many physicists who concentrated solely on the theoretical
side of their work that one could identify two distinct communities.
A new connection with physics is providing a good deal of the driving force
toward speculation in mathematics. Recently there has been a flurry of mathematical-type activity in physics, under headings like “string theory”, “conformal field
theory”, “topological quantum field theory”, and “quantum gravity”. In large part
this has been initiated by individuals trained as theoretical high-energy physicists.
The most celebrated and influential of these (though not the most problematic) is
Edward Witten.
From a physical point of view much of this work has not yet matured to the stage
where observable predictions about nature have been made. Further, the work often
concerns “toy models” designed to display only analogs of real phenomena. And
some of the parts which might apply to the real world concern experimentally
inaccessible events: particles of incredible energy, movement on the scale of the
universe, or creation of new universes.
One result of the lack of predictions is that these physicists are cut off from their
presumptive experimental community; they have no source of relevant physical facts
to constrain and inspire their theorizing. Since progress comes from the interaction
between theory and experiment, a theoretical group cannot exist long in isolation.
Indeed much of the mainstream physics community regards these developments
with suspicion, because of their isolation from the so-called “real world”.
But these physicists are not in fact isolated. They have found a new “experimental community”: mathematicians. It is now mathematicians who provide them
with reliable new information about the structures they study. Often it is to mathematicians that they address their speculations to stimulate new “experimental”
work. And the great successes are new insights into mathematics, not into physics.
produced is not a new physical field theory but a new view of polynomial invariants
of knots and links in 3-manifolds using Feynman path integrals or representations
of quantum groups.
These physicists are still working in the speculative and intuitive mode of theoretical physics. Many have neither training for nor interest in rigor. They are doing
theoretical mathematics. Very senior mathematicians have praised this work and
have suggested it should be emulated. As a result, some mathematical followers
are moving toward a more speculative mode.
One could conclude from this description that parts of mathematics have already
been propelled through the bifurcation. These areas have suddenly acquired a
fully functioning theoretical community, the theoretical physicists, and traditional
mathematicians have become the partner community of rigorous verifiers.
However, this has happened without the evolution of the community norms and
standards for behavior which are required to make the new structure stable. Without rapid development and adoption of such “family values” the new relationship
between mathematics and physics may well collapse. Physicists will go back to their
traditional partners; rigorous mathematicians will be left with a mess to clean up;
and mathematicians lured into a more theoretical mode by the physicists’ example
will be ignored as a result of the backlash. To understand what is involved, we
start with a look at the past.
The rich interplay between mathematics and physics predates even their recognition as separate subjects. The mathematical work that in some sense straddles
the boundaries between the two is commonly referred to as mathematical physics,
though a precise definition is probably impossible. In particular over the past ninety
years or so, a school of mathematical physicists emerged around such persons as
D. Hilbert, F. Klein, H. Poincar´e, M. Born, and later H. Weyl, J. von Neumann,
E. P. Wigner, M. Kac, A. S. Wightman, R. Jost, and R. Haag—persons with training both in physics and in mathematics. These people often worked on questions
motivated by physics, but they retained the traditions and the values of mathematics.
Results emerging from this school have at various times been relevant both for
mathematics and for physics. Their development has proceeded at a deliberate
pace with the accumulation of conclusions of long-term interest. A few (out of
many) recent examples include work on the existence of quantum field theory and
on its compatibility with relativity; the work of Lieb and of Baxter on lattice
models and related transfer matrices; the work of Schoen and Yau on the positive
energy theorem in relativity and its relation to the geometry of minimal surfaces;
the work of Ruelle and others on dynamical systems and turbulence; the operator
algebra approach to local quantum theory; and Connes’s early interest in physics,
from which emerged his mathematical work on factors and later the foundation of
noncommutative geometry.
The main point here is what has not happened. Work from this school is characterized by standards of scholarship and by knowledge of the literature consistent
with the best traditions of mathematics. There is no ambiguity about definitions,
the formulation of claims, or proofs of theorems.
Theoretical physics and mathematical physics have rather different cultures, and
there is often a tension between them. Theoretical work in physics does not need
to contain verification or proof, as contact with reality can be left to experiment.
Thus the sociology of physics tends to denigrate proof as an unnecessary part of
the theoretical process. Richard Feynman used to delight in teasing mathematicians about their reluctance to use methods that “worked” but that could not be
rigorously justified.
On the mathematical side, E. J. McShane once likened the reasoning in a “physical argument” to that of “the woman who could trace her ancestry to William the
Conqueror with only two gaps”, and this was typical of the mathematical attitude.
There was an understanding that the development must proceed at an internally
appropriate pace and not be stampeded by the extent of the physicists’ vision. McShane and most of the mathematical physics community rejected the free-wheeling,
theoretical approach as inappropriate.
A relevant observation is that most theoretical physicists are quite respectful of
their experimental counterparts. Relations between physics and mathematics would
be considerably easier if physicists would recognize mathematicians as “intellectual
experimentalists” rather than think of them disdainfully as uselessly compulsive
theorists. The typical attitude of physicists toward mathematics is illustrated by
a passage from a book of P. W. Anderson, “We are talking here about theoretical
physics, and therefore of course mathematical rigor is irrelevant and impossible.”1
In fact it is exactly as relevant and possible as experimental data, and like data
should be used whenever available. Nevertheless, students in physics are generally
indoctrinated with antimathematical notions; and if they become involved in mathematical questions, they tend not only to be theoretical but often to deny that their
work is incomplete.
Not all of mathematical physics has been as clearly mathematical as that described above. For example, the work of the German mathematical physicist
K. Symanzik was mostly theoretical. However, he was very careful not to make
unwarranted claims of mathematical rigor. In fact, he made a serious attempt
in 1968 to establish an important part of his theoretical program on a rigorous
level in collaboration with the mathematician S. R. S. Varadhan. Some years afterward, this was achieved by E. Nelson, Osterwalder, Schrader, and others and
had far-reaching consequences relating quantum theory, probability, and statistical
mechanics.
We also mention two people who have been addressing largely mathematical
questions from an almost entirely theoretical point of view for some time—namely,
B. Mandelbrot and M. Feigenbaum.
These mathematicians
are unused to dealing with the difference in cultures and for the most part do
not recognize parallels in their own collective experience that would sensitize them
to the hazards of theoretical work. This suggests a question: As they gain more
experience, will these mathematicians also reject pure theorizing?
We turn to mathematical encounters with theoretical work and begin with the
positive side. The posing of conjectures is the most obvious mathematical activity that does not involve proof. Conjectures range from brilliant to boring, from
impossible to obvious. They are filtered by the interest they inspire rather than
by editors and referees. The better ones have inspired the development of whole
fields. Some of the most famous examples are the Riemann Hypothesis, Fermat’s
“last theorem”, and the Poincar´e conjecture. The Hilbert problem list, of amazing
breadth and depth, has been very influential in the development of mathematics
in this century. Other examples are the Adams conjecture in topology, the several
Questions of Serre, the Novikov conjecture, and the Wightman axioms for quantum
field theory.
Some conjectures are accompanied by technical details or a proposal for a proof.
For example, the “Weil conjectures” outlined an approach to a p-adic analog of
the Riemann hypothesis. The implementation of this program by Grothendieck
and Deligne was celebrated as a major achievement for modern algebraic geometry. Similarly celebrated was Falting’s proof of the Mordell conjecture, part of a
program to approach the Fermat “theorem”. The “Langlands program” for understanding automorphic forms has been a major stimulus to that field, and “Mori’s
program” for the investigation of algebraic three-folds has invigorated that area.
The classification of finite simple groups was achieved by implementing a program
developed by Gorenstein.
These examples share the characteristic that they were explicitly speculative
when formulated (or at least quickly recognized as speculative, as for example with
Fermat). They represented a goal to work toward, and primary credit for the
achievement was clearly to be assigned to the person who found a proof.
The National Science Foundation and government agencies in other countries
have tried to nudge mathematics in the direction of collaborative and interdisciplinary work. But one must recognize that large projects in mathematics are not
centered around a grant, a technique, or a machine. They are undertaken by informal communities nucleated by a visionary theoretical program. In the finite simple
group effort, the program was developed and coordinated by D. Gorenstein, who
parcelled out pieces of the puzzle to an informal “team” working on the problem.
Future growth of such large-scale mathematical activity can only occur with the
evolution of more such visionary programs.
Most of the experiences with theoretical mathematics have been less positive
than those described above. This has been particularly true when incorrect or
speculative material is presented as known and reliable, and credit is claimed by
the perpetrator. Sometimes this is an “honest mistake”, sometimes the result of
nonstandard conceptions of what constitutes proof. Straightforward mistakes are
less harmful. For example, the fundamental “Dehn lemma” on two-disks in threemanifolds was presented in 1910. An error was found, and by the time it was proved
(by Papakyriakopolos in 1957) it was recognized as an important conjecture.
Weak standards of proof cause more difficulty. In the eighteenth century, casual
reasoning led to a plague of problems in analysis concerning issues like convergence
of series and uniform convergence of functions. Rigor was introduced as the antidote. It was adopted over the objections of some theorists in time to avoid major
damage.
More recently in this century the “Italian school” of algebraic geometry did not
avoid major damage: it collapsed after a generation of brilliant speculation. See
[EH, K] for discussions of the difficulties and the long recovery. In 1946 the subject
was still regarded with such suspicion that Weil felt he had to defend his interest
in it; see the introduction to [W].
Algebraic and differential topology have had several episodes of excessively theoretical work. In his history [D], Dieudonn´e dates the beginning of the field to
Poincar´e’s Analysis Situs in 1895. This “fascinating and exasperating paper” was
extremely intuitive. In spite of its obvious importance it took fifteen or twenty years
for real development to begin. Dieudonn´e expresses surprise at this slow start [D, p.
36], but it seems an almost inevitable corollary of how it began: Poincar´e claimed
too much, proved too little, and his “reckless” methods could not be imitated. The
result was a dead area which had to be sorted out before it could take off.
Dieudonn´e suggests that casual reasoning is a childhood disease of mathematical
areas and says, “. . . after 1910. . . uniform standards of what constitutes a correct
proof became universally accepted in topology. . .this standard has remained unchanged ever since.” But in fact there have been many further episodes. Ren´e
Thom’s early work on differentiable manifolds, for which he received the Fields
medal, was brilliant and generally solid. Later work on singularities was not so
firm. His claim of C∞ density of topologically stable maps was supported by a
detailed but incomplete outline, which was later repaired by John Mather. Thom
went on to propose the use of “catastrophe theory”, founded on singularities, to
explain forms of physical phenomena.
The early work of Dennis Sullivan provides another example. After a solid beginning, in the 1970s he launched into a brilliant and highly acclaimed but “theoretical”
exploration of the topology of manifolds. Details were weak, and serious efforts to
fill them in got bogged down. Sullivan himself changed fields and returned to a
more rigorous approach. This field still seems to have more than its share of fuzzy
proofs.
William Thurston’s “geometrization theorem” concerning structures on Haken
three-manifolds is another often-cited example. A grand insight delivered with
beautiful but insufficient hints, the proof was never fully published. For many
investigators this unredeemed claim became a roadblock rather than an inspiration.
In these examples, as with Poincar´e, the insights proposed seem to be on target.
There are certainly cases in which the theoretical insights were also flawed. The
point is that even in the best cases there were unpleasant side effects that might
have been avoided. We also see that Witten, in giving a heuristic description of an
extension of the Jones polynomial, was continuing in a long and problematic
tradition even within topology.

When reliability of a literature is uncertain, the issue must be addressed. Often
“rules of thumb” are used. For example, mathematicians presume that papers
in physics journals are theoretical. This extends to a suspicion of mathematicalphysics journals, where the papers are generally reliable (though with dangerous
exceptions). Another widely applied criterion is that anything using functional
integrals must be speculative. One of us has remarked on the difficulties this causes
mathematicians trying to use solid instances of the technique.
These kinds of
rules are unsatisfactory, as is the caveat emptor approach of letting each paper be
judged for itself. Proponents of this latter view cite Witten’s papers as successful
examples. But a few instances can be handled; it is large numbers that are a
disaster. Also, it is a common rule of thumb now to regard any paper by Witten
as theoretical. This short-changes Witten’s work but illustrates the “better-safethan-sorry” approach mainstream mathematics tends to take when questions arise.
This unreliability is certainly a problem in theoretical physics, where the primary
literature often becomes so irrelevant that it is abandoned wholesale. I. M. Singer
has compared the physics literature to a blackboard that must be periodically
erased. Physicists traditionally obtain much less benefit from the historical background of a problem, and they are less apt to search the literature. The citation
half-life of physics papers is much shorter than in mathematics.
The “dead area” problem concerns credit and rewards. Mathematical researchers
traditionally do not give credit twice for the same results. But this means that when
a theorist claims credit, it is difficult for rigorous workers to justify the investment
of labor required to make it reliable. There is a big difference between “filling
in the details of a theorem by X” and “verifying a conjecture of X”. Rigorous
mathematicians tend to flee the shadow of a big claim. The pattern is that the
missing work is filled in, often much later, using techniques and corollaries of work
on separate topics for which uncontested credit is available.
The mathematical community has evolved strict standards of proof and norms
that discourage speculation. These are protective mechanisms that guard against
the more destructive consequences of speculation; they embody the collective mathematical experience that the disadvantages outweigh the advantages. On the other
hand, we have seen that speculation, if properly undertaken, can be profoundly
beneficial. Perhaps a more conscious and controlled approach that would allow us
to reap the benefits but avoid the dangers is possible. The need to find a constructive response to the new influences from theoretical physics presents us with both
an important test case and an opportunity.
Mathematicians should be more receptive to theoretical material but with safeguards and a strict honesty. The safeguards we propose are not new; they are
essentially the traditional practices associated with conjectures. However, a better appreciation of their function and significance is necessary, and they should
be applied more widely and more uniformly. Collectively, our proposals could be
regarded as measures to ensure “truth in advertising”.

This can make the difference between a dead area and a living industry. Theoreticians should recognize that in the long run the success of their work is dependent
on the work of a companion rigorous community; they should honor and nurture
it when possible. Certainly in physics the community assigns basic credit for discovery to successful experimental investigations; they are not regarded merely as
verifying small details in the web of theoretical insight. On the individual level
mathematical authors should make a choice: either they provide complete proofs,
or they should agree that their work is incomplete and that essential credit will
be shared. Referees and editors should enforce this distinction, and it should be
included in the education of students.
The other suggestions are concerned with the integrity of the mathematical literature. It has always been acceptable to state a conjecture in a paper, and occasionally papers have been published that are entirely theoretical. The key issue is
to identify the theoretical material clearlyWithin a paper, standard nomenclature should prevail: in theoretical material, a word like “conjecture” should replace “theorem”; a
word like “predict” should replace “show” or “construct”; and expressions such as “motivation” or “supporting argument” should
replace “proof”. Ideally the title and abstract should contain a
word like “theoretical”, “speculative”, or “conjectural”.

The objective is to have flags indicating the nature of the work to readers. A
flag in the title of a theoretical paper would appear in a citation, which would
help limit second-hand problems.
Research announcements pose particular problems. Some announcements are
simply summaries of work that the author has completed and written down. In
such announcements, the language of theorem and proof is appropriate. Others
describe outcomes of arguments which have not been worked out in detail, and
sometimes they contain leaps of faith which require years of effort to bridge. In
these cases the traditional language misrepresents the work and is not appropriate;
such announcements really should be identified as theoretical. The analysis above
implies that because of this, publication of announcements may be unwholesome
or even damaging to the fabric of mathematics. Announcements do have valid
functions, for instance, establishing a claim to priority and alerting others to new
results and useful techniques. We therefore seek guidelines, as with theoretical work
in general, which will permit beneficial uses but limit the potential damage. The
key issue seems to be incorporation into the literature. One solution is:

In this age of copying machines and electronic bulletin boards it is possible to
distribute information widely without formally publishing it. “Cross-cultural” preliminary results of wide interest could be described informally in “news column”
format in publications like the Mathematical Intelligencer or the Notices of the
American Mathematical Society. The lack of formal publication, therefore, should
be at most a minor disadvantage. We observe that this discussion also underscores
the importance of maintaining the distinction between formal (refereed) publication
and a posting on a bulletin board. Maintaining this distinction may be one of the
greatest challenges facing the development of serious electronic journals.
If these safeguards are carefully followed, then it would be reasonable for any
mathematics journal to consider theoretical articles for publication. Stimulating articles with incomplete proofs might be offered publication (after appropriate word
changes) as theoretical papers. Theoretical mathematics journals might be appropriate. But care is required. Without honesty and caution by authors, editors, and
referees this would simply lead to the reintroduction of problems that have been
painfully and repeatedly purged over the years.
Our analysis suggests that the bifurcation of mathematics into theoretical and
rigorous communities has partially begun but has been inhibited by the consequences of improper speculation. Will it continue? Probably it will in any case,
but it should evolve faster and less painfully if the safeguards are adopted. In
the classical areas it will be slower because intelligent speculation must be based
on a mastery of technical detail in previous proofs. In these areas the framework
for speculation is more likely to provide a constructive outlet for nominally rigorous individuals, whose inspirations exceed their capacity for rigorous proof.
 In some of these areas specialized theorists can already be identified and
are likely to proliferate.
In any case, the proposed framework provides a context for interactions between mathematicians and theoretical physicists. Whether or not they become
a permanent fixture in the mathematical community, physicists can be welcomed
as “theoretical mathematicians” rather than rejected as incompetent traditional
mathematicians.
At times speculations have energized development in mathematics; at other times
they have inhibited it. This is because theory and proof are not just “different” in
a neutral way. In particular, the failure to distinguish carefully between the two
can cause damage both to the community of mathematics and to the mathematics
literature. One might say that it is mathematically unethical not to maintain
the distinctions between casual reasoning and proof. However, we have described
practices and guidelines which, if carefully implemented, should give a positive
context for speculation in mathematics.
We wish to thank many colleagues who have made helpful suggestions about this
paper. The first author thanks the John S. Guggenheim Foundation for a fellowship.
Both authors were partially supported by the National Science Foundation.
